how many people out here think
grant-writing is fun I just the lights
are in my eyes so I just can't tell if
your hands are all up they're all up
right no I know that I know this so like
some other people who have experience
with grant writing it's a harrowing
process I will say that so I started at
the NEA about three and a half almost
four years ago and I do remember many
nights working up against the deadline
huddled in a room or huddled at a
residency or someplace unexpected not
Burning Man but definitely some other
places so before I joined the agency I
used to run squeaky wheel which was a
film and Media Arts Center in Buffalo
New York during this time I worked with
a small staff we really were working on
a shoestring budget we did a lot of
experimental arts programming which is
actually hard to raise money to fund as
many of you probably know because a lot
of people don't understand what that
intersection of arts and experimental
technology is like and were the value of
that so I was at squeaky wheel for ten
years and they learned a lot there
outside of that nonprofit arts
experience I also was an artist I still
do a little bit of work on the side but
I mostly consider my art practice as a
mediator between the funding world and
the arts world so I really look forward
to building relationships with anybody
here in the room we have the office
hours so thanks I'm really excited to
meet the people that we've met so far
and before all of this my education was
at Alfred University which is in a rural
village called Alfred and there's
actually an Alfred alum out here I just
met with him anyway over there yes okay
so at Alfred this will look familiar we
have a we had a sanding video processor
which is basically
it's like the video equivalent of the
Moke synthesizer for a sound so a lot of
my background was also in processing
signals and things like that I studied a
lot of Rudolf Steiner did some artists
shamans and cosmology work I made up my
own major called the aesthetics of video
and sound and studied butoh Pauline
Oliveros things like that really not
practical but I was really glad that
there was actually an organization that
allowed me to work within their walls
and that was squeaky wheel and it was
artists run so I have great appreciation
for places like this like gray area
which is also artists rung because
artists really know what artists need so
anyway that was just a little bit about
me so you know like I'm here to build a
relationship with and I really want to
make myself as accessible as possible
because I know that the process of
funding is is a challenge challenging
one and I like to demystify that as much
as possible so what I'm gonna do is just
tell you a little bit about how the
agency works we're about 140 people in
the media arts discipline department so
I'm the media arts director I have two
people that work with me there they're
media arts grant specialists and their
job is actually to work with you all and
talk to you about the grant process and
have you understand all the questions
that we asked in the application if you
have questions about your work samples
anything like that they're there we're
also there though to hear about what
you're doing because if we're not
hearing about what you're doing we don't
know how to respond to it
so if you haven't been sending us emails
please write my email down it'll be at
the end of this presentation and
inundate us with things I'll probably
take that back later but I really do
want you to know that so the National
Endowment for the Arts we are an
independent federal agency that funds
promotes and strengthens the creative
capacity of communities we do have about
a hundred and fifty five million as our
current congressional appropriation and
forty percent of our total annual budget
supports State Arts agents
in regional arts organizations then the
rest of the money goes towards
individual funds that go to individual
organizations in turn which fund artists
projects so right now we do have
somebody in the office who makes sure
that every congressional district has a
grant so for anybody who is not in a
city this actually works in your favor
geographically we do make sure that all
435 congressional districts have funding
from the National Endowment for the Arts
so visit our website at arts.gov
so what I'm gonna do is give you a
little grant writing crash course is
anybody excited for this oh wow
alright just slowly building it up so
instead of just going right into the
grant writing crash course I wanted to
hook you by showing you who we are
funding right now so the Arts Council of
New Orleans they came in through the
local arts agencies discipline and they
received funding for Luna FET and what
this is is a light art and installation
festival and they bring in local and
international artists and what they do
is create public art installations and
while the artists are in town making the
installations they do workshops for the
public they also do a lot of mentorship
for local artists and the projects that
they put up are all free to people in
the city and there's a lot of
performances presentations and other
youth engagement initiatives that align
with that and the part that we come in
for funding for is the artist fees and
the workshop fees and a little bit of
the staff that it takes to assist with
the installations and things like that
so that's one thing you guys might be
familiar with processing foundation yes
so if you didn't know they have an
artist fellowship program and so we're
currently funding that I remember a
while back when I was talking to Dan
Schiffman about processing Foundation
and what they're doing and how can we
help them
um he was unsure of how to come in to us
for funding especially since we require
a one-to-one match for all of our funds
but he was mentioning how if they
already were supporting seven artists
through their fellowship program and he
was like well since we already get all
of that covered
what would we actually come into you for
and I was like well could you actually
double that and he was like yeah I would
love to serve 14 artists a year so
basically what we were able to do was
just match the program that they were
already doing to expand its capacity so
the fellows received participation
stipends mentorship access and
exhibition opportunities and all of that
work is made freely and available for
use in modification by the general
public and they also have a lot of
partnerships as you know they work with
the code Liberation Foundation yeah all
right come talk to me later they work
with NYU in their ITP program and they
have some city partnerships in Los
Angeles so we also are currently funding
Carnegie Mellon's art encode symposium
and that should be coming up at some
point soon and that's through the studio
for creative inquiry and this is another
interesting story how many of you know
going on at CMU yes what a champion for
the Arts and tech world there so one I
remember when I first started at the
National Endowment for the Arts I had
gotten this really long email from going
on and if you know him he's kind of like
really good at like just articulating
gaps and so a large gap from his
perspective was at the NEA we were
funding a lot of film festivals and
there weren't a lot of art and
technology festivals that were getting
funding and actually I I completely
agreed because that's exactly what
happens in our funding category which
I'll go over it's it's dominated by the
film and a television and the radio
sectors and/or the radio organizations
which is wonderful and we are doing our
best to support all of those projects
too but one
things we're not seeing come in a lot
and I know that there's projects out
there but we're not seeing a lot of
projects that are bringing together
people like this festival like art and
code or things like IO so once I told go
on that like that's why you don't see
that in our funding because you guys
aren't coming in to us for that type of
project
so hopefully that resonates with you and
if any of you are doing these types of
gatherings or convenings and field
building things where you're bringing
people together that's something you can
come in to us for so as I'm showing you
these projects I hope that these like
serve as frameworks for you to come in
to us for funding later on so what we
cover for the art and code symposium
would be the artist fees and travel
scholarships and things like that
at harvest works they have a new works
residency program and again through this
we're covering the artists stipends
every artist who gets into this program
which is an open selection process they
receive $5,000 in commissioning fees and
out of that 2,000 is for the artists off
the top and then the remainder can be
redeemed 14 lab activities and that in
turn helps pay for the artists that are
providing the mentorship to the artists
in the program so that's another model
so if any of you are thinking about
starting these types of projects at the
institution or organization that you run
or if you're an artist this might just
be useful to know about if they weren't
on your radar already motion poems is
another organization that came in to
support a series of commissions in
augmented reality and so the funding
again that we're putting in for is the
commissioning aspect so that's one way
that an organization is really serving
as an umbrella to push money out to
artists who need it to do their projects
so these through this project there
there will be a series of free
site-specific
AR smartphone apps projects that will
showcase different works as people are
on the Green Line light rail system
which goes between Minneapolis and st.
Paul so I think that they'll they're
just starting this project now so if
you're in that area
in the future keep your eyes open for
this they're going to be doing three to
five commissioned works and I think one
of them might be with Maya Lin so should
be pretty exciting to keep an eye on
that and this actually was one of the
first projects that came in to us for a
are just so you know so if there's
anybody who is doing this type of work
please come talk to us because we'd love
to know what people are doing and how we
can help get you through this process of
funding another one is culture hub they
have reef esthe which is a new media
festival and again we cover the artists
fees and things like that and some of
the staff and again they have a lot of
partnerships that present this project
so that's when to keep an eye on and
future roots is another project that
we're funding and they're developing a
quadrophonic plugin and we're finding a
little bit of the development of that
plugin but most importantly after they
make that plugin
they'll be commissioning a series of
quadraphonic sound pieces so the money
is going right to the artists who are
using that so after going through those
different types of projects I hope that
that was encouraging does anybody in
this room feel like they might think
about putting in an application okay all
right good we're seeing an increase now
so this is good so now I'm gonna get
into some of the nuts and bolts I
thought it would be interesting for you
to just keep in mind the notable trends
that we're seeing and I know that you're
seeing them as well paying artists
making sure that transactions are
equitable doing authentic community
engagements and partnerships and doing
these mentorship and peer networking
opportunities so those are the things
that you should be thinking about when
you're putting together an application
so now we're going to enter the crash
course component and I have eight
minutes so if you don't absorb all of
this you can definitely send me an email
there's 14 different artistic
disciplines at the agency I'm just the
representative for the media arts
discipline but should your project fall
into any of these other categories like
let's say if Inferno since that deals
with choreography they
either go into media arts or they can go
into dance it's really up to you it
doesn't it matter to us but just think
about the people who are looking at the
applications the panelists on the other
side so if you feel like people who work
in a traditional dance realm would
understand your project then go into
dance but if you feel like your project
would be best suited to be reviewed by
people in the Arts and Technology field
go into media arts so and if you ever
have any question about that just give
us a call because we can help provide
guidance on your project so as you
notice I keep saying projects projects
projects what is a project it could be
anything so each year if a festival
comes into US that's a project if you're
doing if you're an organization that
runs a residency program that residency
program is the project so it's less
about the individual projects that
you're working on as an artist unless it
was a commission and if it's a
commission then you come in for your
arts project that was a very less
detailed overview but hopefully that
kind of narrows it down a project
doesn't need to be new every year some
people have to think that if they put an
application to us at the next year they
have to like expand it or make it reach
more people or do more residences but
that's not the case
every year your application starts at
ground zero and it's never judged
against your previous year's history so
that's also something to know because we
don't it doesn't always need to be
bigger better faster timelines or more
things like that you can just do what
you're doing and come into us so
thinking a little bit in a modular sense
is as useful probably for you in
reducing your time in doing an
application you'll notice that our grant
amounts are a little bit smaller they're
between 10,000 and 100,000 but every
dollar that you receive from the NEA
historically has been able to leverage
nine additional dollars from other
funders or other entities so think about
our funding as a seed funding that you
that can be iterative in different ways
and kind of accumulate so if you're
wondering if you're eligible for funding
here's your little
a shot here you got to be a 501c3 you
have to have three years of programming
and that's just really to demonstrate
feasibility so if you feel like you
might not make that just let us know
because oftentimes there's ways to talk
you through it so if you're a collective
that just became a non-profit if even
though the years that you have not been
a non-profit count towards that three
years even if it's like planning
something so there's ways to get over
that hurdle and for those of you who
aren't a non-profit I was just talking
to somebody about ways to work around
that because it might seem like a hurdle
but that's really where you can come in
for an application and partnership with
a non-profit let's see if there's an
institution that you you work with or
that presents your work you can have
that institution come in as a lead
partner in a project so for collectives
who never intend to become a non-profit
that might be your way around it and
then that institution then would come in
to us for funding and have an
organization fee or curatorial or a
participation fee that goes to your
collective so there's just a lot of
different ways you can think about
coming in to us for funding but that's
just a general overview in the media
arts discipline we do fund creation and
exhibition and education and
distribution of any genre and form of
art that is intersecting with technology
so you will be put into a category that
does share the funding with traditional
film radio and broadcasts and things
like that but what we try to do on our
end is put all of the media arts
applications or the more experimental
ones in one batch so that way we have
panelists who are reviewing that who
understand that work and aren't just
like versed in the documentary world so
it's really getting a fair process right
now because I really wanted to address
that gap of sometimes when more
experimental applications come through
they might not be as successful if they
didn't have the right people looking at
them so for us we have two deadlines
each year the first one's really geared
towards exhibition related activities
and the second one's really about making
new work or doing anything that is about
professional development
the careers of artists so there's a wide
range of things that you can come in to
us for it's not limited to this either
as long as you just call us if you have
any questions because I know it can be
challenging but give us a call because
we always love to hear what you're up to
our guidelines are released at the end
of each year around December like the
middle of December so if you aren't on
our newsletter sign up for it
we don't really send out too many
newsletters but we also highlight
grantees and other projects that you
might want to know about so sign up for
our newsletter you might wonder what
happens after your application is
submitted and it doesn't go into a black
void it actually goes into this portal
called reach and I don't actually know
what their acronym for reaches I don't
know why they named it that but it's you
know that it's reaching it's reaching us
so after an application is submitted it
goes through a peer-review process so
you might have heard me mentioned if
you're unde an sis getting reviewed by
dance specialists if you're coming into
theater if you have theater people
looking at that so one thing I would
like you all to think about is
volunteering as a panelist for the NEA
because we might pull from you to be a
review panelist so send an email if
you're interested in doing that all the
applications are reviewed on our
criteria of artistic excellence and
merit which it's very vague like what is
excellence right but it really has to do
with where the project is what you're
doing in it how are they doing it so we
really rely on the peer review panel to
determine the excellence of an
application so it doesn't have to be
something that's really like high level
it could be something that's really
grassroots and doing smaller impactful
work there is a myth that this funding
at the agency is for larger institutions
but that's not true we do fund a
majority of smaller organizations and
smaller projects so if your project is
only serving four artists that's totally
fine because those artists are actually
making impact in communities in a
different way you can check out the full
review criteria on here
I suggest that you do sign up for a
panelist there's a lot of resources
online so I'm running out of time so
this is interesting because I didn't
even think I had enough time Chris this
is a good bar for you
nope and Chris bar we were both nervous
that we didn't have enough to fill our
presentation so now I'm going to talk
faster actually so okay there's online
resources at arts.gov checking out
everything on there is useful for you in
different ways I have a packet here of
more recently supported grants that you
can use as a framework to think about
how you can come in to us for funding
here is my contact information here's my
colleagues contact information use that
come get my card if you can't get that
my next thing though it was really about
systems change and one of the things I'm
hearing you guys talk about is how do
you change systems and I want to change
the system of funding and how that goes
out and who's coming in to us if you're
not coming in to us we're not you're not
going to see yourselves reflected in the
arts funding disciplines in the
government side so just remember that
government arts funding comes in three
tiers there's federal funding there's
state funding and there's local arts
agency funding each one of them has
streams of you to tap into you'll notice
there that the total direct expenditures
on the arts by local governments is
going up capitalize on that there's
smart city development there's all these
things where they need people like you
and your brains to intersect with what
they're doing so really get at the table
develop those partnerships now and get
people engaged with what you're doing
because if you're not there at the table
they're gonna pick somebody else and I'm
just saying that because you guys are
all qualified and doing amazing work and
there's ways that you can become
sustainable and doing your practice but
also doing more of the other work so we
really are interested in packing that
creative ecosystem so one thing I wanted
to announce is that we are doing an arts
and technology field scan in partnership
with Knight Foundation and Ford
Foundation and this is a new initiative
that's really unpacking that economy or
that you're it's kind of unpacking the
ecosystem for you guys and where you're
getting your money from where you need
support where you're not getting that
the resources that you need to like
survive so keep an eye on that
there's two key research questions that
we're doing one is how are you
incorporating technology in your
artistic practice and this is this by
collecting this information we're able
to be a bridge to other Arts Council's
and other state arts agencies and
teaching them how to serve you better so
I'm hoping that by the time we put out
this report that you're already like
having these conversations with them so
through this process of investigation
we're hoping to build the bridges for
you guys and I really need your support
and that and I hope that we all kind of
can continue to talk more about that and
then the second thing we're looking at
is the sources of support so as I was
saying we'll just be shaking down
through all these questions and so
getting these answers means working with
you guys so we'll have two phases of
research the first one is doing
roundtables in different areas though
there will be a virtual roundtable and I
would love it if you guys want ear to
participate in that if you feel like
that's something you'd want to do send
an email to a Froelich later my
colleague and we'll sign you up and make
sure that you get a notification when we
do that and then after we do all this
research and a literature scan and a
grant analysis and all of these things
we'll put it together in a nice fancy
report and I'll go to places like the
net other NASA the arc NASA do you guys
know about the art assets the National
Assembly of State Arts agencies yeah two
ways so that's where all the State Arts
agencies go and they convene and they
learn about trends in the field and two
years ago when I presented at that about
what you guys are all doing in this
world they had they were let their minds
are blown and they're like where do we
find these people and only California in
New York not surprisingly knew what I
was talking about and then the rest were
really like how do we do this so for any
of you looking to develop those
partnerships this is what we're gonna be
doing with this report so we'll be
connecting people will also present at
the grant makers and the arts and things
like that so we'll be working on through
our systems to make the systems change
on that end but I really need your
participation in that so please send us
an email and hopefully we can create
some new patterns together and here is
how you can do that and all of these
things will create a ripple effect what
I learned is
all of our like our locations inside our
agency between all the different
disciplines they're like they're based
on how many applications came in the
previous year so I would love to see a
40% increase filled with Arts and
Technology related applications so that
would be a huge score let's let's do it
[Applause]